docs/how-tos/pyxem.md, before:

# Kikuchi diffraction via pyxem

In recent years shortcomings of classical text-based file formats for serializing Kikuchi diffraction data have been realized and lead to a replacement of these formats with proprietary and open-source alternatives that use the [Hierarchical Data Format (HDF)5](https://www.hdfgroup.org/solutions/hdf5) library. At the point when we started the implementation of the Kikuchi diffraction examples for the FAIRmat project several of these formats were not yet supported by MTex. In parallel, we recognize that pyxem and kikuchipy entered the stage to offer complementary analyses capabilities for Python users. Therefore, we decided that as a technical implementation example we will implement the first version of the Kikuchi diffraction ontology matching using the I/O and orientation math capabilities of these Python libraries.

As a result, this pyxem-based parsing of HDF5-serialized content equips the pynxtools-em parser and normalizer currently with functionalities to read the following content and map on respective NeXus concepts that are defined in the NXem application definition and the NXem_ebsd base class:

| Orientation, phase | NeXus/HDF5 |
| --------------- | --------------  |
| [Oxford Instruments H5OINA HDF5](https://github.com/oinanoanalysis/h5oina) | :heavy_check_mark: |
| [Bruker Esprit HDF5](https://www.bruker.com/de/products-and-solutions/elemental-analyzers/eds-wds-ebsd-SEM-Micro-XRF/software-esprit-family.html) | :heavy_check_mark: |
| [H5EBSD-based community format](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/2193-9772-3-4) | :heavy_check_mark: |
| [ThermoFisher Velox](https://www.thermofisher.com/de/de/home/electron-microscopy/products/software-em-3d-vis.html) | :heavy_check_mark: |
| [EDAX APEX](https://www.edax.com/products/ebsd/apex-software-for-ebsd) | :heavy_check_mark: |
| [DREAM.3D v6](https://dream3d.bluequartz.net) | (:heavy_check_mark:) |
| [EMsoft HDF5](https://github.com/EMsoft-org/EMsoft) | (:heavy_check_mark:) |

Commit message:

Fixes for #17 and removal of deprecated mapping code (#21)
* Added VSStudio launch file for debugging code

* Implemented reviewer suggestions from @sherjeelshabih made on https://www.github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools/tree/em_refactoring commit 84b473d

* Replaced function calls for add_metadata to no longer use deprecated functions

* Removed obsolete reflattening code

* Replaced use of deprecated add_specific_metadata in zip.axon reader

* Replaced calls to deprecated function with correct one for Velox reader

* Removed the already deprecated old add_specific_metadata code. Now no more code duplication but one mapping_functor set of function which the subparsers use for adding specific metadata

* Harmonized axis names and fixed incorrect axis name for EMD

* Reactivated and made working the example of how to map conventions/reference frames

* Added and tested NOMAD Oasis custom ELN schema for documenting definitions of reference frames used

* Proof-reading through the documentation and funding statement

---------

Co-authored-by: mkuehbach <markus.kuehbach@physik.hu-berlin.de>

docs/how-tos/pyxem.md, after:

# Kikuchi diffraction via pyxem

In recent years shortcomings of classical text-based file formats for serializing Kikuchi diffraction data have been realized and lead to a replacement of these formats with proprietary and open-source alternatives that use binary containers like [Hierarchical Data Format (HDF)5](https://www.hdfgroup.org/solutions/hdf5). At the point when we started the implementation of the Kikuchi diffraction examples for the FAIRmat project, several of these formats were not yet supported by MTex. In parallel, we acknowledge the complementary analyses capabilities for Python users that the work of the pyxem and hyperspy developers providers for the electron microscopy community. Therefore, we decided that as a technical implementation example we will implement the first version such that it uses, apart from MTex, the I/O and orientation math capabilities of these Python libraries.

As a result, this pyxem-based parsing of HDF5-serialized Kikuchi diffraction content equips the pynxtools-em parser and normalizer currently with functionalities to read the following content and map on respective NeXus concepts that are defined in the NXem application definition and the NXem_ebsd base class:

| Orientation, phase | NeXus/HDF5 |
| --------------- | --------------  |
| [Oxford Instruments H5OINA HDF5](https://github.com/oinanoanalysis/h5oina) | :heavy_check_mark: |
| [Bruker Esprit HDF5](https://www.bruker.com/de/products-and-solutions/elemental-analyzers/eds-wds-ebsd-SEM-Micro-XRF/software-esprit-family.html) | :heavy_check_mark: |
| [H5EBSD-based community format](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/2193-9772-3-4) | :heavy_check_mark: |
| [ThermoFisher Velox](https://www.thermofisher.com/de/de/home/electron-microscopy/products/software-em-3d-vis.html) | :heavy_check_mark: |
| [EDAX APEX](https://www.edax.com/products/ebsd/apex-software-for-ebsd) | :heavy_check_mark: |
| [DREAM.3D v6](https://dream3d.bluequartz.net) | (:heavy_check_mark:) |
| [EMsoft HDF5](https://github.com/EMsoft-org/EMsoft) | (:heavy_check_mark:) |
