README.md, before:

[![Ruff](https://img.shields.io/endpoint?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/astral-sh/ruff/main/assets/badge/v2.json)](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff)
![](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools-em/actions/workflows/pytest.yml/badge.svg)
![](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools-em/actions/workflows/pylint.yml/badge.svg)
![](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools-em/actions/workflows/publish.yml/badge.svg)
![](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/pynxtools-em)
![](https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/pynxtools-em)
![](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/pynxtools-em)
![](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools-em/badge.svg?branch=master)

# A parser and normalizer for electron microscopy data

# Installation
It is recommended to use python 3.11 with a dedicated virtual environment for this package.
Learn how to manage [python versions](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv) and
[virtual environments](https://realpython.com/python-virtual-environments-a-primer/).

This package is a reader plugin for [`pynxtools`](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools) and thus should be installed together with `pynxtools`:
```shell
pip install pynxtools[em]
```

for the latest development version.

# Purpose
This reader plugin for [`pynxtools`](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools) is used to translate diverse file formats from the scientific community and technology partners
within the field of electron microscopy into a standardized representation using the [NeXus](https://www.nexusformat.org/) application definition [NXem](https://fairmat-nfdi.github.io/nexus_definitions/classes/contributed_definitions/NXem.html#nxem).

## Supported file formats
This plugin supports the several file formats that are currently used for electron microscopy.
A detailed summary is available in the [reference section of the documentation](https://fairmat-nfdi.github.io/pynxtools-em).

# Getting started
[A getting started tutorial](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools-em/tree/main/examples) is offered that guides you
how to use the em reader for converting your data to NeXus from a Jupyter notebook. Note that not every combination of
supported file formats and input for the parser allows to fill required and recommended fields and attributes of the NXem
application definition. Therefore, you may need to provide an ELN file that contains the missing values in order for the
validation step of the EM reader to pass.

# Contributing
We are continously working on adding parsers for other data formats, technology partners, and atom probers.
If you would like to implement a parser for your data, feel free to get in contact.

## Development install
Install the package with its dependencies:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools-em.git --branch main --recursive pynxtools_em
cd pynxtools_em
python -m pip install --upgrade pip
python -m pip install -e .
python -m pip install -e ".[dev,docs]"
```

<!---There is also a [pre-commit hook](https://pre-commit.com/#intro) available
which formats the code and checks the linting before actually commiting.
It can be installed with
```shell
pre-commit install
```
from the root of this repository.

## Development Notes-->

## Test this software
Especially relevant for developers, there exists a basic test framework written in
[pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/) which can be used as follows:

```shell
python -m pytest -sv tests
```

## Contact person in FAIRmat for this reader
Markus Kühbach

Commit message:

Update Readme, starting refactoring of EBSD-focused parsers to enable… (#64)
* Update Readme, starting refactoring of EBSD-focused parsers to enable making them more general

* Started breaking refactoring of EBSD parsers

* Initial refactoring for ebsd functionalities of former pyxem parser

* Starting initial refactoring of eds functionalities of former pyxem parser

* Fixed generic regridding 1d, 2d, fixed H5OINA overview plot, next step fix IPF maps

* Reactivated and fixed IPF plotting, next apex

* Working on the refactoring of apex

* Fixed apex EBSD

* Reflecting update of nxdefs

* Eventually breaking changes using latest fairmat defs and pynxtools master dev branch

* Eventually breaking changes which removes np.column_stack in ebsd.py

* Refactoring dream3d

* finished code refactoring of remaining hfive parsers, next up: i) testing kdtree, ii) testing all

* Initial test of apex and oxford successful after refactoring including with new definitions, next steps i) add eds, ii) testing and removing mismatch to appdef

* Continuing on the refactoring of apex going slower than expected

* Fixed examples Laehnemann using new schema

* Removed deprecated add_specific_metadata code, unified reporting when a parser does not find content

* Viteshs example (#65)

* Initial tests for implementing #51

* Fixed dangling units

* Linting

* Completed and tested Viteshs example

---------

Co-authored-by: mkuehbach <markus.kuehbach@physik.hu-berlin.de>

---------

Co-authored-by: mkuehbach <markus.kuehbach@physik.hu-berlin.de>

README.md, after:

[![Ruff](https://img.shields.io/endpoint?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/astral-sh/ruff/main/assets/badge/v2.json)](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff)
![](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools-em/actions/workflows/pytest.yml/badge.svg)
![](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools-em/actions/workflows/pylint.yml/badge.svg)
![](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools-em/actions/workflows/publish.yml/badge.svg)
![](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/pynxtools-em)
![](https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/pynxtools-em)
![](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/pynxtools-em)
![](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools-em/badge.svg?branch=master)

# Parse and normalize electron microscopy data

## Installation
It is recommended to use python 3.11 with a dedicated virtual environment for this package.
Learn how to manage [python versions](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv) and
[virtual environments](https://realpython.com/python-virtual-environments-a-primer/).

This package is a reader plugin for [`pynxtools`](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools) and thus should be installed together with `pynxtools`:
```shell
pip install pynxtools[em]
```

for the latest release version from [pypi](https://pypi.org/project/pynxtools-em/).

If you are interested in the newest version, we recommend to work with a development installation instead.

## Purpose
This reader plugin for [`pynxtools`](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools) is used to translate diverse file formats from the scientific community and technology partners
within the field of electron microscopy into a standardized representation using the [NeXus](https://www.nexusformat.org/) application definition [NXem](https://fairmat-nfdi.github.io/nexus_definitions/classes/contributed_definitions/NXem.html#nxem).

## Supported file formats
This plugin supports several file formats that are currently used within the research field of electron microscopy.
A detailed summary is available in the [reference section of the documentation](https://fairmat-nfdi.github.io/pynxtools-em).

## Getting started
[A getting started tutorial](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools-em/tree/main/examples) is offered that guides you
how to use the em reader for converting your data to NeXus from a Jupyter notebook. Note that not every combination of
supported file formats and input for the parser allows to fill required and recommended fields and attributes of the NXem
application definition. Therefore, you may need to provide an ELN file that contains the missing values in order for the
validation step of the EM reader to pass.

## Contributing
We are continously working on improving the collection of parsers and their functionalities.
If you would like to implement a parser for your data, feel free to get in contact.

## Development install
Install the package with its dependencies:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools-em.git --branch main --recursive pynxtools_em
cd pynxtools_em
python -m pip install --upgrade pip
python -m pip install -e ".[dev,docs]"
pre-commit install
```

The last line installs a [pre-commit hook](https://pre-commit.com/#intro) which
automatically formats the code and checks the linting before actually commiting.

## Development Notes-->

## Test this software
Especially relevant for developers, there exists a basic test framework written in
[pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/) which can be used as follows:

```shell
python -m pytest -sv tests
```

## Contact person in FAIRmat for this reader
Markus Kühbach
