docs/index.md, before:

---
hide: toc
---

# Documentation for pynxtools-em

pynxtools-em is a free and open-source data software for creating standardized semantic serializations of electron microscopy data and metadata for research data management using [NeXus](https://www.nexusformat.org/), implemented with the goal to make scientific research data FAIR (findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable).

pynxtools-em, which is a plugin for [pynxtools](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools), provides a tool for reading data and metadata from various proprietary and open data formats from technology partners and the wider electron microscopy community and standardizing it such that it is compliant with the NeXus application definition [`NXem`](https://fairmat-nfdi.github.io/nexus_definitions/classes/applications/NXem.html).

pynxtools-em is developed both as a standalone reader and as a tool within [NOMAD](https://nomad-lab.eu/), which is the open-source research data management platform for materials science we are developing with [FAIRmat](https://www.fairmat-nfdi.eu/fairmat).

pynxtools-em solves the challenge of using heterogeneous and semantically ambiguous serialization formats which is common in electron microscopy. In addition, it provides an interface for writing readers for different file formats to be mapped to NeXus.

pynxtools-em is useful for scientists from the electron microscopy community, for technology partners, software developers, and data providers who search for ways to make their data more completely aligned with the aims of the FAIR principles. Specifically the tool is useful for research groups who wish to organize their research data based on an interoperable standard.

<div markdown="block" class="home-grid">
<div markdown="block">

### Tutorial

A series of tutorials giving you an overview on how to store or convert your EM data to NeXus compliant files.

- [Installation guide](tutorial/installation.md)
- [Standalone usage](tutorial/standalone.md)
<!-- - [Convert EM (meta)data to NeXus](tutorial/standalone.md)
- [How to use a NeXus/HDF5 file](tutorial/nexusio.md)
- [How to combine data from different sources](tutorial/examples.md)-->

</div>
<div markdown="block">

### How-to guides

How-to guides provide step-by-step instructions for a wide range of tasks, with the overarching topics:

- [Kikuchi diffraction](how-tos/kikuchi.md)

</div>

<div markdown="block">

### Explanation

The explanation section provides background knowledge on the implementation design.<!--, how the data is structured, how data processing can be incorporated, how the integration works in NOMAD, and more.-->

- [Implementation design](explanation/implementation.md)
<!-- - [NOMAD EM App](explanation/emapp.md)-->

</div>
<div markdown="block">

### Reference

<!--This is the place where to add documentation of [diátaxis](https://diataxis.fr) content type reference.-->
Here you can learn which specific pieces of information and concepts pynxtools-em currently supports
for the respective file formats of technology partners of the electron microscopy community.

- [How to map pieces of information to NeXus](reference/contextualization.md)

- [Conventions collected with a text file or ELN](reference/conventions.md)
- [Metadata collected with an ELN and RDM-specific configurations](reference/eln_and_cfg.md)

- [AXON Protochips Portable Network Graphics PNG](reference/zip_png_axon.md)
- [FEI Legacy Tagged Image File Format TIFF](reference/tiff_fei.md)
- [EDAX APEX](reference/hfive_apex.md)
- [Gatan DigitalMicrograph DM3/DM4](reference/rsciio_gatan.md)
- [Hitachi Tagged Image File Format TIFF](reference/tiff_hitachi.md)
- [JEOL Tagged Image File Format TIFF](reference/tiff_jeol.md)
- [Nion Co. projects with NDATA and HDF5 files](reference/nxs_nion.md)
- [Point Electronic DISS Tagged Image File Format TIFF](reference/tiff_point.md)
- [TESCAN Tagged Image File Format TIFF](reference/tiff_tescan.md)
- [ThermoFisher Tagged Image File Format TIFF](reference/tiff_tfs.md)
- [ThermoFisher Velox EMD](reference/rsciio_velox.md)
- [Zeiss Tagged Image File Format TIFF](reference/tiff_zeiss.md)
- [EBSD-centric content for the parsing route via MTex](how-tos/mtex.md)
- [EBSD-centric content for the parsing route via pyxem](how-tos/pyxem.md)

</div>
</div>

<h2>Project and community</h2>

- [NOMAD code guidelines](https://nomad-lab.eu/prod/v1/staging/docs/reference/code_guidelines.html) 

Any questions or suggestions? [Get in touch!](https://www.fair-di.eu/fairmat/about-fairmat/team-fairmat)

[The work is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) - 460197019 (FAIRmat).](https://gepris.dfg.de/gepris/projekt/460197019?language=en)

Commit message:

Harmonization with other pynxtools plugin using cruft template (#145)
* Working in changes as per the cruft template, top-level directory

* Working in changes as per the cruft template, CI scripts

* Working in changes as per the cruft template, vscode and scripts

* Working in changes as per the cruft template, src

* Working in changes as per the cruft template, tests

* fail-fast false

* Working in changes as per the cruft template, docs

* Working in changes as per the cruft template, fixing CI

* Further spelling issues

* Modify name of entry_point

* Skip testing the app, as it does not exist yet

* Working in changes as per the cruft template, minor edit

* cruft update manually performed, inspected, and implemented

---------

Co-authored-by: mkuehbach <markus.kuehbach@physik.hu-berlin.de>

docs/index.md, after:

---
hide: toc
---

# Documentation for pynxtools-em

pynxtools-em is a free and open-source data software for creating standardized semantic serializations of electron microscopy data and metadata for research data management using [NeXus](https://www.nexusformat.org/), implemented with the goal to make scientific research data FAIR (findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable).

pynxtools-em, which is a plugin for [pynxtools](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools), provides a tool for reading data and metadata from various proprietary and open data formats from technology partners and the wider electron microscopy community and standardizing it such that it is compliant with the NeXus application definition [`NXem`](https://fairmat-nfdi.github.io/nexus_definitions/classes/applications/NXem.html).

pynxtools-em is developed both as a standalone reader and as a tool within [NOMAD](https://nomad-lab.eu/), which is the open-source research data management platform for materials science we are developing with [FAIRmat](https://www.fairmat-nfdi.eu/fairmat).

pynxtools-em solves the challenge of using heterogeneous and semantically ambiguous serialization formats which is common in electron microscopy. In addition, it provides an interface for writing readers for different file formats to be mapped to NeXus.

pynxtools-em is useful for scientists from the electron microscopy community, for technology partners, software developers, and data providers who search for ways to make their data more completely aligned with the aims of the FAIR principles. Specifically the tool is useful for research groups who wish to organize their research data based on an interoperable standard.

<div markdown="block" class="home-grid">
<div markdown="block">

### Tutorial

A series of tutorials giving you an overview on how to store or convert your EM data to NeXus compliant files.

- [Installation guide](tutorial/installation.md)
- [Standalone usage](tutorial/standalone.md)
- [Development guide](tutorial/contributing.md)
<!-- - [Convert EM (meta)data to NeXus](tutorial/standalone.md)
- [How to use a NeXus/HDF5 file](tutorial/nexusio.md)
- [How to combine data from different sources](tutorial/examples.md)-->

</div>
<div markdown="block">

### How-to guides

How-to guides provide step-by-step instructions for a wide range of tasks, with the overarching topics:

- [Kikuchi diffraction](how-tos/kikuchi.md)

</div>

<div markdown="block">

### Learn

The explanation section provides background knowledge on the implementation design.<!--, how the data is structured, how data processing can be incorporated, how the integration works in NOMAD, and more.-->

- [Implementation design](explanation/implementation.md)
<!-- - [NOMAD EM App](explanation/emapp.md)-->

</div>
<div markdown="block">

### Reference

<!--This is the place where to add documentation of [diátaxis](https://diataxis.fr) content type reference.-->
Here you can learn which specific pieces of information and concepts pynxtools-em currently supports
for the respective file formats of technology partners of the electron microscopy community.

- [How to map pieces of information to NeXus](reference/contextualization.md)

- [Conventions collected with a text file or ELN](reference/conventions.md)
- [Metadata collected with an ELN and RDM-specific configurations](reference/eln_and_cfg.md)

- [AXON Protochips Portable Network Graphics PNG](reference/zip_png_axon.md)
- [FEI Legacy Tagged Image File Format TIFF](reference/tiff_fei.md)
- [EDAX APEX](reference/hfive_apex.md)
- [Gatan DigitalMicrograph DM3/DM4](reference/rsciio_gatan.md)
- [Hitachi Tagged Image File Format TIFF](reference/tiff_hitachi.md)
- [JEOL Tagged Image File Format TIFF](reference/tiff_jeol.md)
- [Nion Co. projects with NDATA and HDF5 files](reference/nxs_nion.md)
- [Point Electronic DISS Tagged Image File Format TIFF](reference/tiff_point.md)
- [TESCAN Tagged Image File Format TIFF](reference/tiff_tescan.md)
- [ThermoFisher Tagged Image File Format TIFF](reference/tiff_tfs.md)
- [ThermoFisher Velox EMD](reference/rsciio_velox.md)
- [Zeiss Tagged Image File Format TIFF](reference/tiff_zeiss.md)
- [EBSD-centric content for the parsing route via MTex](how-tos/mtex.md)
- [EBSD-centric content for the parsing route via pyxem](how-tos/pyxem.md)

</div>
</div>

<h2> Contact </h2>

For questions or suggestions:

- Open an issue on the [`pynxtools-em` GitHub](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools-em/issues)
- Join our [Discord channel](https://discord.gg/Gyzx3ukUw8)
- Get in contact with our [lead developers](contact.md).

<h2>Project and community</h2>

- [NOMAD code guidelines](https://nomad-lab.eu/prod/v1/staging/docs/reference/code_guidelines.html)

[The work is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) - 460197019 (FAIRmat).](https://gepris.dfg.de/gepris/projekt/460197019?language=en)
