docs/reference/contextualization.md, before:

# How to map pieces of information to NeXus

Conceptually, mapping between representations of concepts and instance data is a key tasks in information science. The plugin pynxtools-em implements this specifically for the file and serialization formats used within the research field of electron microscopy. The plugin offloads this code from eventually other software where NeXus is used to avoid that every user and software developer has to make individual changes in their own tool.

Technically, instance data representing concepts within the realm of one ontology or file format are considered the source (`src`) and mapped on instance data representing a concept in NeXus as the target (`trg`). This map is only performed by pynxtools-em, if `src` and `trg` can be transformed such that `src` and `trg` are connected via an `same_as` relationship. A transformation can be as simple as that an instance `src` has an elementary data type (e.g. a string or single-precision floating point value) that is copied into an instance `trg` of the same data type. Often though such a mapping demands further normalization. One example is when `src` represents quantity such as a tilt angle with unit radiants but `trg` requires that value to be in degrees. In this case, the transformation is composed of a copy and a multiplication to read the value from `src`, convert from radiants to degrees, and return the value as `trg`.

Such transformations are configured via the respective files in the *config* directory of pynxtools-epm.
Upon parsing, it is the set of function in *mapping_functor.py* which implements the actual transformations by reading the configuration and returning the properly formatted and transformed target to sucessively fill the `template` dictionary variable. The name functor is used as mapping may demand to use not only a copy or data type conversion as it was explained before. It is this *template* variable from which core functions like *convert.py* of the pynxtools write the actual NeXus/HDF5 file. The latter tool is also referred to as the dataconverter of [pynxtools](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools).

Commit message:

Fixes for #17 and removal of deprecated mapping code (#21)
* Added VSStudio launch file for debugging code

* Implemented reviewer suggestions from @sherjeelshabih made on https://www.github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools/tree/em_refactoring commit 84b473d

* Replaced function calls for add_metadata to no longer use deprecated functions

* Removed obsolete reflattening code

* Replaced use of deprecated add_specific_metadata in zip.axon reader

* Replaced calls to deprecated function with correct one for Velox reader

* Removed the already deprecated old add_specific_metadata code. Now no more code duplication but one mapping_functor set of function which the subparsers use for adding specific metadata

* Harmonized axis names and fixed incorrect axis name for EMD

* Reactivated and made working the example of how to map conventions/reference frames

* Added and tested NOMAD Oasis custom ELN schema for documenting definitions of reference frames used

* Proof-reading through the documentation and funding statement

---------

Co-authored-by: mkuehbach <markus.kuehbach@physik.hu-berlin.de>

docs/reference/contextualization.md, after:

# How to map pieces of information to NeXus

Conceptually, mapping between representations of concepts and instance data is a key tasks in information science. The plugin pynxtools-em implements this specifically for serialization formats used within the research field of electron microscopy. The plugin offloads this code from other software to avoid that every user and software developer have to make individual changes in their own tools.

Technically, instance data representing concepts within the realm of one ontology or file format are considered the source (`src`). These instance data are mapped on instance data representing a concept in NeXus as the target (`trg`). A transformation can be as simple as that an instance `src` has an elementary data type (e.g. a string or single-precision floating point value) that is copied into an instance `trg` of the same data type. Often though, such a mapping demands further normalization. One example is when `src` represents say a quantity such as a tilt angle with a value in unit radiants but `trg` requires that this value should be stored in unit degrees. In this case, the transformation is composed of a read of the value from `src`, a multiplication to convert from radiants to degrees, and the return of the value as `trg`.

Such transformations are configured via the respective files in the *config* directory of pynxtools-em.
Upon parsing, it is this set of functions in *mapping_functor.py* which implement the actual transformations by reading the configuration and returning the properly formatted and transformed target to fill the `template` dictionary variable.

The name functor is used because mapping may demand (as above-mentioned) more than copying the instance data. It is this *template* variable from which core functions like *convert.py* of the pynxtools library then write the actual NeXus/HDF5 file. The latter tool is also referred to as the dataconverter of [pynxtools](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools).

<!--This map is only performed by pynxtools-em, if `src` and `trg` can be transformed such that `src` and `trg` are connected via an `same_as` relationship.-->
